Add agent skill for cudf_polars expressions (#23078)
rapidsai/cudf: .agents/skills/review-cudf-polars-expressions/SKILL.md

---

# Polars Expression implementation in cudf_polars

This rule describes guidelines and implementation patterns for supporting Polars' Expression Python APIs in cudf_polars. A successful implementation:

1. Runs entirely on the GPU through cudf_polars and does not fall back to Polars on the CPU.
2. If an expression cannot be supported or only partially supported (e.g. a parameter is unsupported), an error is raised during IR translation and not during runtime.
3. The expression is supported for all Polars versions that cudf_polars supports specified in `python/cudf_polars/pyproject.toml`
4. Passes all `pre-commit` checks.

## Prerequisites

1. Identify a suitable cudf-polars development environment, if not provided by the user, and ensure the Polars version is the latest supported version by cudf_polars.
2. Identify a directory that contains the Polars source code to use as a reference for implementations. If it is not provided by the user or one cannot be identified, clone it to a temporary location. Ensure the Polars Git source tree is checked-out to the same Polars version installed in the development environment.

> For example, to clone Polars matching the Polars version in a fictional, conda development environment named "my-env"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to clone Polars matching the Polars version in a fictional, conda development environment named "cudf-dev"
```

to match what's used in the conda command below

```bash
POLARS_VERSION=$(conda run -n cudf-dev python -c "import polars as pl; print(pl.__version__)")
git clone https://github.com/pola-rs/polars.git --single-branch --branch py-$POLARS_VERSION /tmp/polars
```

If you are unable to clone Polars, the Polars repository is located at https://github.com/pola-rs/polars.

## Step 1: Understand the Polars expression implementation and behavior.

First, review the Polars implementation of the expression and understand its behavior without cudf-polars.

* The Python APIs for expressions are mostly defined in the `py-polars/src/polars/expr` directory in a Polars repository.
* Expressions are eventually exposed to cudf-polars in Rust in the `crates/polars-python/src/lazyframe/visitor/expr_nodes.rs` file in a Polars repository

> Next, generate examples locally with the expression(s) to implement or review to further understand the behavior.

Reviewer: Idle thought: is generating examples better? Or should we tell it to find the relevant tests in the polars repo?

Author: I suppose it doesn't hurt to instruct an agent to look at Polars unit tests for understanding, but I'll keep the example generation since in a later step I added to use generated example to generate unit tests

2. A failure might occur because an expression isn't supported in cudf-polars.
3. An expression might not be implemented when run in the multiple partition path of cudf_polars and might fall back to the single partition path.

## Step 3: Implement the Polars expression in cudf-polars.

### Step 3a. Single Partition Implementation

Start with scoping an implementation for the single partition path for cudf_polars. This ensures that the multiple partition path can fall back to this implementation.

1. An expression implementation should belong in the `python/cudf_polars/cudf_polars/dsl/expressions` directory.
2. Review the `pylibcudf` API to find the appropriate function or functions needed for the implementation.
    1. Additionally review the `libcudf` public API as a function may be appropriate but not exposed through `pylibcudf`. If needed, expose this API through `pylibcudf` as part of the implementation. `pylibcudf` will need to be rebuilt from source in order to test the implementation.
    2. Minimize the amount of kernel launches by using specific `pylibcudf` functions where possible. Evaluate using `pylibcudf.expressions` where sensible for combining several operations.

>     3. Do not use any `pylibcudf` that are deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Do not use any `pylibcudf` methods that are deprecated.
```

    4. Implement any short-circuiting opportunities by checking Column properties like the `null_count` or `size` that minimizes `pylibcudf` calls.
    5. Do not use APIs that convert the data CPU objects like `to_arrow` or `to_pylist` unless absolutely necessary.
    6. Ensure `pylibcudf` APIs calls are passed a stream object so they do not use their default stream argument.
    7. Follow any additional guidance in `python/REVIEW_GUIDELINES.md`
3. When raising an exception to match Polars or to note that some functionality is not supported, prefer raising these exceptions in the `__init__` method instead of the `do_evaluate` methods of the `Expr` subclasses.
4. Ensure the `is_pointwise` on the `Expr` subclass correctly reflects if the expression is a pointwise operation.

### Step 3b. Multiple Partition Implementation

Next, if the expression is non-pointwise, add a multiple partition implementation in `python/cudf_polars/cudf_polars/streaming/expressions.py`

TODO: Add more guidance on a multiple partition implementation.

> ## Step 4: Test the Polars expression implementation in cudf-polars

Reviewer: Should we move (part of) this to before the implementation, to encourage writing a failing test first?

Author: Instead in the testing section, I instructed the agent to `git stash` the implementation and run the new test to check that they fail as expected first.
